## Symbiolite formation: A powerful in vitro model to untangle the role of bacterial communities in the photosynthesis-induced formation of microbialites

### Matthew R. Nitschke, Cátia Fidalgo, João Simões, Cláudio Brandão, Artur Alves, João Ser&#0244;dio, J&#0246;rg C. Frommlet

[Link to manuscript at ISME](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41396-020-0629-z)

Abstract: Microbially induced calcification is an ancient, community-driven mineralisation process that produces different types of microbialites. Symbiolites are photosynthesis-induced microbialites, formed by calcifying co-cultures of dinoflagellates from the family Symbiodiniaceae and bacteria. Symbiolites encase the calcifying community as endolithic cells, pointing at an autoendolithic niche of symbiotic dinoflagellates, and provide a rare opportunity to study the role of bacteria in bacterial–algal calcification, as symbiodiniacean cultures display either distinct symbiolite-producing (SP) or non-symbiolite-producing (NP) phenotypes. Using Illumina sequencing, we found that the bacterial communities of SP and NP cultures differed significantly in the relative abundance of 23 genera, 14 families, and 2 phyla. SP cultures were rich in biofilm digesters from the phylum Planctomycetes and their predicted metagenomes were enriched in orthologs related to biofilm formation. In contrast, NP cultures were dominated by biofilm digesters from the Bacteroidetes, and were inferred as enriched in proteases and nucleases. Functional assays confirmed the potential of co-cultures and bacterial isolates to produce biofilms and point at acidic polysaccharides as key stimulators for mineral precipitation. Hence, bacteria appear to influence symbiolite formation primarily through their biofilm-producing and modifying activity and we anticipate that symbiolite formation, as a low-complexity in vitro model, will significantly advance our understanding of photosynthesis-induced microbial calcification processes.
